**9 b) Cyber-flashing**

**Video overview of [cyber-flashing](https://youtu.be/FGEf4AZeiss) by
Kaito Suzuki**

**What is cyber-flashing?**

"Cyber-flashing" is a term referred to when someone sends or shares
unsolicited nude, semi-nude, or sexually explicit photos or videos to
another person without their consent, commonly referred to as "dick
pics". Flashing, also known in Australian law as "indecent acts" or
"obscene exposure", involves exposing one's genitals in a public place,
and was one of the earliest forms of sexual harassment which has been
addressed in Australian legislation. With advancements in technology,
this common form of harassment has evolved into a new digital form of
sexual harassment. It has been facilitated by features such as AirDrop
and Bluetooth, and become commonplace on social media platforms like
Snapchat and dating applications such as Tinder and Bumble.

**What is the problem with cyber-flashing?**

The concerns surrounding cyber-flashing was highlighted internationally
in the context of apps such as Bumble, where research revealed that 41%
of women have been sent an unsolicited photo of male genitals without
their consent. Consequently, Bumble have been advocating for
strengthening protections for women online (this form of sexual
harassment is disproportionately experienced by women).

Domestically, the 2023 [Online Safety Issues
Survey](https://www.infrastructure.gov.au/department/media/publications/2023-online-safety-issues-survey-summary-report)
found that nearly 8% of those surveyed had experienced cyber-flashing in
the last 12 months. Similarly, this survey found experiences of
cyber-flashing were predominately women and people who identify as
LGBTQIA+.

**Cyber-flashing: international approaches**

The United Kingdom's *Online Safety Act 2023* created a criminal offence
for a person sending photographs or films of their genitals to intend to
cause alarm, distress or humiliation. It carries a prison sentence of up
to 2 years.

In Ireland, the *Online Safety and Media Regulation Act 2022*
criminalises the act of exposing one's genitals online with the intent
to cause fear, distress, or alarm to others.

Other countries such as Singapore, Scotland and some parts of the United
States have also developed law reforms in response to the issue of
cyber-flashing. Information on each country's response to cyber-flashing
can be found
[here](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0022018320972306).

**Australia's approach**

In Australia, cyber-flashing is not specifically addressed or regulated
in any legislation, including the *Online Safety Act 2021* (Cth). A
single instance of cyber-flashing is not explicitly criminalised unless
the victim is under 18, in which case it may be considered as sending
child exploitation material.

"Indecent or obscene exposure" is addressed under section 5 of the
*Summary Offences Act 1988* (NSW) which carries a maximum of 10 units
(fine) or six months' imprisonment. However, cyber-flashing does not
fall under this category as a summary offence. The offence of indecent
exposure is specifically for public places, and while an unsolicited
"dick pic" would constitute indecent exposure, the definition of public
place under the Act does not extend to online communication.

The most relevant Commonwealth legal provision that applies to
cyber-flashing in Australia is found in section 474.14 of the *Criminal
Code Act 1995* (Cth). This provision criminalises the use of carriage
services (such as the internet) to menace, harass, or cause offence,
carrying a maximum penalty of three years' imprisonment. The offence
applies if a reasonable person would consider the conduct as menacing,
harassing, or offensive. However, this offence usually applies where
someone uses equipment connected to a telecommunications network in the
commission of, or to facilitate the commission of, a serious
offence.[^1]

The states also have criminal law provisions that may capture
cyber-flashing.

-   In Victoria, section 48 of the *Crimes Act 1958* (Vic) imposes an
    offence if a person engages in sexual activity directed to another
    person intending for that person to experience fear or distress from
    seeing the activity. However, the legality of this section in
    applying to cyber-flashing would depend on the context of the image
    and how courts interpret the specifics of an activity.

-   In South Australia, section 53 of the *Summary Offences Act* 1953
    (SA) creates a summary offence to behave in an indecent manner in a
    public place or in a place visible from a public place, or in any
    place with the intent to offend or insult another person. Whilst
    this does open the interpretation more than that of the Commonwealth
    law, the application of this in the digital space is still limiting.
    As cyber-flashing does not occur in a public place, the application
    of this offence to cases of unsolicited explicit images is unclear.

[^1]: *R v TB (No 5)* \[2023\] SASC 118.
