***[Cyberbullying and hate speech]{.mark}***

Young children and adolescents are being increasingly impacted by the
high use of electronic devices and social media, resulting in bullying,
exclusion and intimidation of young people.[^1]

Cyberbullying involves bullying online. It occurs where a perpetrator
intentionally acts violently towards a victim repeatedly over a long
period of time through a variety of social media platforms such as
Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat or other online forums, often anonymously.
It falls under the umbrella term 'cyber hate', which encompasses many
types of harmful behaviours including hate speech, harassment, and
discrimination targeting individuals based on their personal
characteristics or identity.

A
[study](https://www.esafety.gov.au/research/digital-lives-of-aussie-teens)
by the eSafety Commissioner was completed in 2020. 44% of Australian
young people reported having a negative online experience in the last 6
months, and 15% had received threats or abuse online.

**[Adult Cyber Abuse Scheme paragraph to add]{.mark}**

Part 7 of the *Online Safety Act 2021* (Cth) establishes an Adult Cyber
Abuse Scheme **(scheme),** the first in the world. This scheme provides
the eSafety Commissioner with the power to issue service providers with
a formal notice to remove harmful content targeting an Australian adult
within 24 hours. The provider could incur civil penalties and fines if
they fail to remove the harmful content. Section 162 of the *Online
Safety Act* gives the Commissioner the powers to seek these penalties.
However, there is a high threshold to be satisfied before the eSafety
Commissioner has the authority to act:

-   Section 7(1)(c) requires that the material was "intended to have an
    effect of causing serious harm"; and

-   Section 7(1)(d) requires that "an ordinary reasonable person in the
    position of the Australian adult would regard the material as being,
    in all the circumstances, menacing, harassing or offensive."

There is question about what surpasses the threshold and what is of a
'serious' nature as the harm can be subjective and arbitrary.[^2]

[^1]: Diana M. Suelves, Ana R. Guimeráns, M Mercedes, & Silvia L Gómez,
    'Cyberbullying: Education research (2023) 13(8) Education Sciences
    763.

[^2]: Penny Crofts, & Honni V. Rijswijk, 'Bringing Cyber Hate Under
    Control Through a Pro-active Legal Approach: An Australian Case
    Study' (2024) Springer International Publishing 261-274.
