**Debate: Protecting online safety vs freedom of speech/expression**

The expanded powers of the eSafety Commissioner (**Commissioner**) under
the *Online Safety Act 2021* (Cth) have sparked significant debate
around the balance between ensuring online safety and protecting the
freedom of speech and expression. Advocates argue that these powers are
crucial for combatting the increasing occurrence of harmful online
content, including cyberbullying, image-based abuse and violent
material.[^1] They believe that the measures and powers under the
Commissioner are essential to protect the vulnerable individuals,
particularly children from severe harm.

However, critics express concerns that the Commissioner's expanded
authority could infringe on freedom of expression and speech through
censorship and overreach. They argue that the Act lacks sufficient
safeguards to prevent the wrongful removal of legitimate content such as
satire or other material that might be misclassified as harmful. For
example, the restrictions on material classified under Class 2 materials
including lawful content such as R18+ and X18+ content could
unnecessarily interfere with sexual health information, education
resources and the rights of sex workers to express themselves and
conduct their work, which limits their expression.[^2]

**[Learning Activity: Analysing the Balancing between Online Safety and
Freedom of Speech and Expression]{.underline}**

This learning activity is aimed to deepen the understanding of these
diverse perspectives and developing critical thinking skills.

**Instruction:**

1.  Read and review the *Online Safety Act 2021* (Cth) and reflect on
    how the powers granted to the Commissioner might affect both safety
    and suppression of free speech and expression.

2.  Research two real-world examples where online safety measures
    effectively protected individuals or where measures lead to concerns
    about freedom of speech and expression. Consider Australian cases
    and international cases.

3.  Write a post for your online course's discussion forum regarding
    whether the current powers of the commissioner are effective in
    balancing freedom of speech and expression while protecting
    individuals. Include your research in your analysis.

    a.  Consider: Are powers too broad? Do they allow free
        speech/expression? Could the powers be improved?

4.  Engage in a peer's discission post and provide feedback on their
    arguments and clarity.

This activity can be adapted for in-person debate where students pick a
side of the argument and debate each other on their research and written
discussion.

[^1]: Lorraine Finlay', *Protecting Free Speech Doesn't Mean Dismissing
    Online Safety* (Web Page)
    https://humanrights.gov.au/about/news/opinions/protecting-free-speech-doesnt-mean-dismissing-online-safety

[^2]: Nicolas Suzor, Lucinda Nelson, Rosalie Gillett, and Jean Burgess,
    'QUT Digital Media Research Centre submission in response to the
    Online Safety Bill 2021' (2021)
    <https://eprints.qut.edu.au/208582/>.
