**USA PATRIOT Act**

The [[USA PATRIOT
Act]{.underline}](https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-107publ56/pdf/PLAW-107publ56.pdf),
officially known as the "Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing
Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of
2001," was a keystone in the national security enhancement strategy
passed by the United States (**US**) Government after the September 11,
2001 terrorist attacks. Its provisions have considerably broadened the
surveillance and investigative authorities of federal agencies. It was
intended to mitigate future attacks by giving the government broad
authorities to track and access communications and financial data across
international borders and within the US.[^1]

The Act has profound implications for data privacy, particularly in the
context of cloud services. It grants US government agencies access to
any kind of personal data stored by a US-based cloud provider, no matter
the country of origin of the owner or where the data lies. This means
that even if a business or individual outside the US chooses a cloud
service that operates within the US or has headquarters there, their
data could still be subject to scrutiny under the PATRIOT Act.[^2]

Sections 215 and 505 of the PATRIOT Act raise concerns for data
privacy: 

-   Section 215 of the Act, often referred to as the "business records"
    provision, allows federal agencies to request any person or entity
    to hand over "any tangible things" relevant to a terrorism
    investigation. This section grants the government broad authority to
    collect a wide range of business records without requiring a court
    order. Importantly, according to the original version of the Act,
    this authority could be used to gather information in bulk, even if
    the data pertains to individuals not directly under investigation,
    raising significant concerns about overreach and privacy.

<!-- -->

-   Section 505 authorises the issuance of National Security Letters
    (**NSLs**), which are administrative subpoenas that allow federal
    agencies to demand certain types of records from companies, such as
    telecommunication firms and internet service providers, without
    prior judicial approval. Unlike Section 215, NSLs are more targeted
    but come with a "gag order" that prevents companies from informing
    individuals about the government\'s data request. This secrecy adds
    another layer of concern regarding transparency and the potential
    misuse of these powers.

The PATRIOT Act is criticised as undermining the ability of other
countries to enforce their own data privacy laws, leading to legal
complexities and confusion. This has implications for companies that
handle sensitive or personal data and must comply with strict data
protection regulations, such as the:

-   [[General Data Protection Regulation
    (GDPR)]{.underline}](https://gdpr-info.eu/) in the European Union,

-   [[Personal Data Protection Act
    (PDPA)]{.underline}](https://www.pdpc.gov.sg/overview-of-pdpa/the-legislation/personal-data-protection-act)
    in Singapore, or

-   Russian [[Federal Law on Personal Data
    (152-FZ)]{.underline}](https://www.consultant.ru/document/cons_doc_LAW_61801/).

The PATRIOT Act\'s provisions may conflict with such legislation.[^3]

Additionally, the Act raises ethical concerns about the balance between
national security and individual privacy. Public awareness of these
issues grew significantly after Edward Snowden\'s 2013 revelations about
the extent of US government surveillance, particularly the bulk data
collection under section 215. Snowden\'s disclosure further turned the
public eye to such surveillance powers, eventually followed by legal
reforms (the [[USA FREEDOM
Act]{.underline}](https://www.congress.gov/114/plaws/publ23/PLAW-114publ23.htm)
of 2015, which tried to limit some of the more controversial practices).
While the USA FREEDOM Act curtails bulk data collection, many of the
core provisions affecting cloud hosting, such as access to information
stored by US-based providers, remain largely intact. This underlines
ongoing ethical concerns of trading off national security against
personal privacy, especially to the disadvantage of non-US citizens who
are using US-based cloud services.[^4]

[^1]: Rackow, S. H., \"How the USA Patriot Act Will Permit Governmental
    Infringement upon the Privacy of Americans in the Name of
    Intelligence Investigations,\" University of Pennsylvania Law
    Review, vol. 150, no. 5 (2002), p. 1651

[^2]: David Bender, 'Privacy and Security Issues in Cloud Computing'
    (2012) 29 The Computer & Internet Lawyer
    [[http://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A303642866/AONE?u=anon\~5970f3a4&sid=googleScholar&xid=49d89645]{.underline}](http://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A303642866/AONE?u=anon~5970f3a4&sid=googleScholar&xid=49d89645) 

[^3]: Aaronson, S., Data Is Disruptive: Hinrich Foundation White Paper
    (2021)
    [[https://www.wita.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/Data-is-disruptive-Hinrich-Foundation-white-paper-Susan-Aaronson-August-2021.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.wita.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/Data-is-disruptive-Hinrich-Foundation-white-paper-Susan-Aaronson-August-2021.pdf) 

[^4]: The Snowden Effect Six Years On (2019)
    [[https://www.justsecurity.org/64464/the-snowden-effect-six-years-on/]{.underline}](https://www.justsecurity.org/64464/the-snowden-effect-six-years-on/) 
