**Privacy Protection in the United States of America**

**Constitution**

The right to privacy is not explicitly provided for in the United States
Constitution. However, the Bill of Rights (that is, some of the first 10
amendments to the Constitution) protect against invasion of privacy by
state actors. These include the First Amendment provision on the right
to free assembly, the Fourth Amendment provision against unwarranted
seizure or search, the Ninth Amendment provision against denial of right
due to others, and the Fourteenth Amendment provision on the right to
due process. These Amendments combine to broadly establish a
constitutional basis for the protection against invasion of personal
privacy by state agencies.

**Federal legislation**

There is no particular federal legal framework that holistically
provides for privacy regulation or data protection in the United States.
Instead, several sector-specific federal laws focusing on different
types of data represent an attempt at privacy protection legislation,
including:

-   The *Children's Online Privacy Protection Act 2000* recognises the
    inherent safety and privacy risks posed by online harm to children
    and thus seeks to protect information privacy for children below the
    age of 13. It severely restricts the type of information or data
    about the children organisations are allowed to gather, distribute
    or appropriate. Most notably, the Act expressly requires website
    operators to not only notify parents but also acquire 'verifiable
    parental consent' prior to 'collecting, using, or disclosing' any
    personal and private data from children (Federal Register, 2024).

<!-- -->

-   The *Driver's Privacy Protection Act 1994* seeks to protect personal
    information collected by the Department of Motor Vehicles. The Act
    regulates the privacy, storage, use, and disclosure of the personal
    information about drivers the Department collects on its online
    system with a view to safeguarding against misuse and data breaches.

<!-- -->

-   The *Video Privacy Protection Act 1988* guarantees the privacy of
    the personal information provided by individuals on online streaming
    sites. It proscribes unauthorised disclosure of personal records of
    people using online video streaming services, stipulates certain
    exceptions under which such information may be disclosed, and
    establishes penalties for related violations.

<!-- -->

-   *Cable Communications Policy Act 1984* establishes and safeguards
    subscriber privacy. It stipulates the manner in which cable system
    operators can collect and use personal information besides
    prohibiting them from collecting or using such data without first
    obtaining the express consent of the subscribers. The Act also
    restricts cable systems from collecting only the data they require
    to effectively offer their services to their subscribers and to
    safeguard cable communication from unauthorised reception.

**State laws**

In Alaska, the *Alaska Right of Privacy Amendment 1972* expressly
recognises the right to privacy for the Alaskan people and sets out
explicit provisions to safeguard the right and protect it from
infringement.

In Montana, the *Montana Constitution* in Article 2, subsection 10
expressly entrenches the right of its residents to individual privacy.
The provision further recognises the right to privacy as a key component
in ensuring the welfare of a free society. It prohibits the infringement
of this right with the exception being when compelling state interests
can be demonstrated.

Other states including Florida and Washington provide for privacy
protection through their respective constitutions and varied privacy
legislations. For instance, the Florida Constitution in Article 1,
subsection 23 stipulates every person is entitled to be left alone and
their private life to be free from any form of intrusion. The instrument
however provides for instances when the government can intrude into the
private life of a person effectively demonstrating that the right to
privacy in the state is not absolute. Similarly, the Washington
Constitution seeks to protect the privacy of its residents through
Article 1, subsection 7 which prohibits the state from invading homes or
disturbing the private affairs of the residents without explicit legal
authority. The provision safeguards the online communication and
correspondences of private individuals against illegal access, searches
and interception by state actors.

**Case law**

Across the United States, several court decisions have concerned privacy
protection.

The first such court decision was rendered in the case *Pavesich v. New
England Life Insurance Company* (1905) in which the right to privacy was
recognised based on constitutional values, common law, and natural law.

The case *Cohen v. Cowles Media Co.* (1991) was also instrumental in
establishing standards for the intrusion of seclusion and solitude which
are key elements in the protection of the right to privacy. Decisions
rendered by the court in the case stipulate when the intrusion of
seclusion can be said to have occurred, that is, when the perpetrator
deliberately invades electronically, physically or by other means the
private affairs, seclusion, solitude, or private space of a person,
where such intrusion is exceedingly offensive any reasonable person. The
case further established the three core considerations that ought to be
made to determine if an intrusion has taken place including:

-   the use of fraudulent, misleading, or deceptive tactics to gain
    access;

-   if intrusion or invitation to intrude occurred; and

-   whether privacy was expected.

The court decision in the case *New York Times Co. v. Sullivan* (1964)
established the standard on the tort of privacy on what constitutes
false light. As a result, for breach of the right to privacy a
non-public person is entitled to, specifically the tort of false light,
to be determined as having occurred, the purported misleading or untrue
impression created about them must be determined as having been a
function of actual malice. The decision has been instrumental in
interpreting the right to privacy due to non-public persons hence
promoting the protection of not only their personal privacy but also
their emotional and mental wellbeing in the event of a breach.
