**7 The Right to be Forgotten**

**A. What is 'The Right to be Forgotten'?**

The right to be forgotten (also known as the 'right to erasure') grants
individuals the ability, in certain circumstances, to have their
personal and private information removed from the internet, where it no
longer serves a significant public interest. Exercising the right to be
forgotten removes the subject information from search engine results.
Although it's not completely 'deleted', it significantly reduces the
visibility and accessibility of the information. There have been recent
calls for Australia to introduce a 'right to be forgotten'.

**B. The Right to be Forgotten in Europe**

In the 2014 case of *Google Spain SL v Agencia Española de Protección de
Datos* (**Google Spain**), the right to be forgotten was formally
recognised as a fundamental right for Europeans.

Mr Mario Costeja Gonzalez filed a complaint against Google Spain and the
Spanish Data Protection Agency, because searching his name on Google
revealed a link to a 1998 newspaper article, which described information
about his personal debts. Gonzalez argued that the information was
irrelevant and infringed on his personal privacy. In its decision, the
European Court of Justice ruled in Gonzalez's favour. The court stated
that individuals had the right to request the removal of links to
personal information when the information was 'inadequate, irrelevant,
no longer relevant, or excessive'. This gave rise to the right to be
forgotten (also known as the right to erasure) for Europeans, which
prior to the decision, was far more theoretical and lacked legal
definition. The General Data Protection Regulation (**GDPR**) now
outlines the right to erasure under Article 17.

**C. Australia and the Right to be Forgotten**

The case of Google Spain and the enaction of the GDPR indicates that
privacy protection for individuals with unequal bargaining power against
large corporations, is a significant policy concern in the European
Union. Whilst many of these privacy issues are similarly addressed by
Australian policymakers and courts, Australians do not have the right to
be forgotten.

Instead, Australians rely on protection from the Australian Privacy
Principles (**APPs**) under the *Privacy Act 1988* (Cth) and traditional
remedies, such as the tort of defamation. Although APP 11 and 13 require
the destruction, de-identification or correction of information,
Australia does not come close to providing adequate protection for
citizens in comparison to the GDPR. Currently, there is minimal
legislative guidance as to how and what steps should be taken by
entities to remove personal information. On the other hand, whilst the
tort of defamation may help remove slanderous content, it cannot address
privacy concerns regarding harmful, yet true, public information.
Defamation is also limited by practical issues, for example, the
difficulty of enforcing a judgment when the online content is posted by
an unknown or foreign individual. This has drawn sharp criticism from
Australians seeking stronger safeguards regarding the handling of their
personal information.

**Australian Common Law**

In the South Australian case of *Duffy v Google Inc*, whilst not
directly referring to the right to be forgotten, the Supreme Court held
that because Google Inc had published the personal data of Dr Duffy,
they were responsible for its removal. It still remains to be seen
whether higher courts in Australia adopt this position in similar cases.

**Legislative Reform**

In 2019, the Attorney-General released its report on the *Privacy Act
1988* (Cth) and proposed the adoption of a right to be forgotten into
Federal legislation. In 2023, the Australian Government released its
response to the Attorney-General's Privacy Act Review Report. The
Government's response concluded that it was necessary to overhaul
Australia's privacy laws, with the ultimate goal to ensure that the
Privacy Act remained fit for purpose in the ever-changing digital age.
Within the response, the Government announced a number of proposed
updates and agreed in-principle at proposal 18.3 that Australians
required the individual right to request an entity to delete (or
de-identify) personal information, with the exception of purposes
required for law enforcement and national security:

*Proposal 18.3*

Introduce a right to erasure with the following features:

a)  An individual may seek to exercise the right to erasure for any of
    their personal information.

b)  An APP entity who has collected the information from a third party
    or disclosed the information to a third party must inform the
    individual about the third party and notify the third party of the
    erasure request unless it is impossible or involves disproportionate
    effort. In addition to the general exceptions, certain limited
    information should be quarantined rather than erased on request, to
    ensure that the information remains available for the purposes of
    law enforcement.

In September 2024, the first tranche of the Government's proposed
Privacy Act reforms were announced. However, proposal 18.3 was not
amongst the selected reforms put forward in the Privacy and Other
Legislation Amendment Bill 2024. There remains no right to be forgotten
in Australia.
