**2a.** **The Challenge of Online Abuse: Trolling**

**What is trolling?**

Trolling takes many forms. Trolls typically respond to or post
inflammatory, off-topic, or ludicrous material to generate an emotional
response from users. This behaviour can lead to a pile-on effect, where
others join in on the attack. Many Australian users experience online
trolling. The most common platforms for such encounters are Instagram,
YouTube, and Snapchat. On these platforms, trolling is often confused
with cyberbullying.

**What do users who experience trolling have to do?**

In Australia, it is up to the individual to report to the online service
first. This typically involves the user collecting evidence, such as
screenshotting abusive comments and reporting the troll within the app.
When the service does not remove the content within 48 hours, an
individual can report to eSafety if their experience meets the legal
threshold of serious cyberbullying. A key message to internet users on
platforms is to not feed into the trolls and report the abuse within the
used app.

Social media platforms can be reluctant to change bullying policies as
they try to balance users\' freedom of speech, privacy, and protection.
Private intermediaries that do not make in-app regulatory changes, such
as social media platforms, continue to amplify the voices of trolls.

**Trolling and the law**

Compared with other online antisocial behaviour, such as cyberbullying,
trolling remains largely unregulated within the legal framework of
Australia. There are fundamental differences between cyberbullying and
trolling behaviours regarding form, content, intent, and consequence.
These differences are not reflected in the *Online Safety Act 2021*
(Cth), which has formed a world-first cyber abuse scheme for adult
Australians and introduced new basic online safety expectations to
promote and improve online safety. Although researchers have deemed
cyberbullying and trolling to be different behaviours, the *Online
Safety Act* *2021* (Cth) does not specifically protect the safety of
users from being trolled, and no other legislation exists that
specifically targets trolling in Australia.

To have access to a legal remedy, Australian residents seeking justice
for being trolled on platforms need to fall within legal provisions in
the *Online Safety Act 2021* (Cth) and *Criminal Code Act 1995* (Cth)
that regulate cyberbullying, harassment, image-based abuse, or offensive
and illegal content. Trolling can, but doesn't always, fall within these
definitions.

If the complaint fits within the criteria, a complaint can be made to
the Commissioner about the matter. Criteria includes:

-   Under s 30 of the *Online Safety Act*, an Australian child who has
    reason to believe they are a target of cyber-bullying material on
    platforms is a justified matter.

-   An Australian Adult under s 36 can make a complaint if they believe
    they have been a target of cyberabuse material.

-   Under s 474.17 of the *Criminal Code Act,* an offence is set out in
    the way a 'reasonable person would regard as being, in all the
    circumstances, menacing, harassing or offensive'.

Both the *Online Safety Act 2021* (Cth) and *Criminal Code Act
1995* (Cth) address cyberbullying and harassment broadly and require
modifications to address trolling effectively.

**Social Media (Anti-Trolling) Bill**

The federal government introduced an exposure draft on *Social Media
(Anti-Trolling) Bill 2021* (Cth) shortly after the decision in *Fairfax
Media Publications Pty Ltd v Voller.* The High Court found that media
companies can be held responsible for alleged defamatory third-party
comments made on Facebook accounts of media companies. The Bill intended
to address defamatory comments by exposing anonymous commenters through
platforms obtaining their contact details. The Bill established a
limited role on trolling issues and lapsed at the dissolution of
Parliament in April 2022.
