**Cyberstalking: Technology-Facilitated Abuse**

Cyberstalking, also referred to as adult cyber abuse, is a form of
technology-facilitated abuse that utilises technology, smart devices,
and online platforms or services to intimidate or cause a person to
reasonably fear for their safety or that of others. It can begin with
excessive attention or privacy invasion, but often it involves more
harmful intentions like intimidating, humiliating, manipulating, or
damaging someone\'s reputation. Cyberstalking is often accompanied by
offline stalking and it can lead to physical danger.

One example is using GPS tracking devices to monitor a person's
movements or location, such as Bluetooth tiles or Apple AirTags, which
are ordinarily used to keep track of luggage or keys. These devices are
being used as they are small enough to not be noticed when they are
placed on a person or in their bag or car by the person stalking them.
In June 2024 the NSW Crime Commission released a report that one in four
people who purchased a GPS tracking device since the beginning of 2023
were also known to have a history of domestic violence. [^1]

Other studies have found that the use of tracking apps in mobile
devices, such as smartphones which have geolocation software or GPS, are
being more commonly used for the purpose of cyberstalking, as this kind
of software or app often comes preloaded on the person's phone, such as
the 'FindMy' app on Apple devices.

**4b NSW Legislation**

In New South Wales, cyberstalking offences are provided for under
section 13 of the *Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act* *2007*
(NSW) (**'CDVP'**), as they are often found to relate to "stalking or
intimidation with the intent to cause fear of physical or mental
harm",[^2] and section 7 of the *Online Safety Act 2021* (Cth)
(**'OSA'**). An offence under section 13 of the CDVP may also need to
satisfy the provisions or definitions under the OSA to succeed in court.

**4c Queensland Legislation**

In Queensland, legislation specifically refers to the use of technology,
such as computer and smartphone devices, emails, text messaging, and
social media platforms, with respect to stalking offences (s 359B,
Criminal Code Act 1899 (Qld)).

[^1]: NSW Crime Commission: Project Hakea Report, Criminal use of
    tracking and other surveillance devices in NSW (June 2024)
    **\<**<https://www.crimecommission.nsw.gov.au/hakea-final-report-25-june-2024.pdf>\>

[^2]: *Crimes (Domestic and Personal Violence) Act 2007* (NSW) s 13.
