**6 Digital Products**

**What is a Digital Product?**

The term digital product encompasses any item on the internet that can
only be accessed via a technological device, that the user has 'earned'
the right to use through a transaction, usually financial.[^1] Examples
include e-books, video game files and movie downloads. Consumers may
assume that purchasing an e-book on a website affords the same rights as
purchasing a physical book on a website, but this is not always the
case.

**Terms and Conditions**

When purchasing digital products, the rights of the consumer are
dictated by the terms and conditions of the platform selling the
product.[^2] As these transactions are typically concluded by
browse-wrap or click-wrap methods, it is difficult to contest problems
that may arise as there is no option to negotiate the terms and
conditions. Australian courts have confirmed that it is the
responsibility of the signatory to be aware of a website's terms and
conditions when making an online purchase.

**Example: Microsoft Store's book category closure**

In April 2019, Microsoft [closed the book category of its online
store](https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/account-billing/books-in-microsoft-store-faq-ff0b7b84-7052-4088-9262-d7e4ee22419c).
As well as preventing future sales, this closure affected previous
sales. From July 2019, purchased e-books were permanently removed from
consumer's devices. The decision sparked conversation about what
ownership means in the context of digital products, and how much control
consumers have over the products they have purchased. In the instance of
Microsoft Store consumers, they were licensees whose rights of use were
dictated by Microsoft. Unlike purchasing a novel from a physical or
online bookstore, where the purchaser can use that book regardless of
what happens to the vendor where it's purchased, e-books are controlled
by the vendor and can be removed from devices or even altered after
being purchased. This is despite the fact that e-book transactions are
completed with 'buy now' options, not 'lease now' options (see
[Amazon\'s Kindle
store](https://uonstaff-my.sharepoint.com/personal/mkh799_newcastle_edu_au/Documents/BACKUP%20OF%20DOCS%20for%20Onedrive/TEACHING/2024%20teaching/LAWS6087/unedited%20wiki%20edits/Amazon's%20Kindle%20store)).

**Consumer law and digital products**

The Australian Consumer Law does not impose any obligations of sustained
access to a purchased digital product.

The notion that users are licensing these digital products, rather than
purchasing them, requires the definitions of goods and services to be
considered. Consumer guarantees for goods are concerned with the quality
and freedom of use of the good, whereas consumer guarantees for services
are concerned with the duration and purpose of the service.[^3] It is
only if digital products are considered a good that there will be a
consumer right to continued use of the digital product.

The Australian Consumer Law states that the term 'goods' is inclusive of
objects including computer software.[^4] The programs that facilitate
the use of e-books, like Amazon's Kindle app and device, and Apple's
Books app, are computer software; however, digital products do not fit
into this definition as easily. In [*Valve Corporation v Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission* \[2017\] FCAFC
224](https://jade.io/article/567886), the Federal Court considered the
implication of 'computer software' in relation to goods. Edelman J at
\[156\] stated that the data that accompanies computer software is not a
good, but conceded that it is difficult to differentiate the two. A
recent dispute involving video games confirms that digital products are
considered a service rather than a good.

**Example: Ubisoft's *The Crew***

In December 2023, Ubisoft, a video game publisher, removed one of its
titles, *The Crew*, from both digital stores and the consoles of users
who had already purchased the game. Ubisoft were discontinuing the
servers that *The Crew* relied on to be played. The withdrawal of the
game was permitted under the end-user license agreement. This led to a
[petition](https://www.aph.gov.au/e-petitions/petition/EN6080) demanding
the enactment of legislation that requires digital products to remain
operational without support from its publisher. In response, the
Assistant Treasurer and Minister for Financial Services stated that
digital products [confer a license to use the product, not a right of
ownership](https://epetitions.aph.gov.au/api/ministerialresponse/download/EN6080).

As long as digital products are considered services rather than goods,
the Australian Consumer Law offers limited protection for consumers of
digital products. Their license to use the digital product will be
governed by the terms and conditions set by the company.

[^1]: Alp Toygar, C. E. Tapie Rohm Jr. & Jake Zhu, 'A New Asset Type:
    Digital Assets' (2013) Journal of International Technology and
    Information Management 22(4), 113.

[^2]: Australian Communications Consumer Action Network, 'Access to
    Digital Assets upon Death or Incapacity: Submission by the
    Australian Communications Consumer Action Network to the New South
    Wales Law Reform Commission' (2018)
    <https://lawreform.nsw.gov.au/documents/Current-projects/Digital%20assets/Preliminary%20submissions/PDI10.pdf>

[^3]: Competition and Consumer Act 2010 (Cth), Sch 2, 'The Australian
    Consumer Law', ss 51-59; 60-63.

[^4]: Competition and Consumer Act 2010 (Cth), Sch 2, 'The Australian
    Consumer Law', s 2.
