**[Beyond ISPs: Intermediary Liability for Copyright to Software and
Hardware Facilitators]{.underline}**

The liability of technological intermediaries in copyright law has
historically centred around Internet Service providers (**ISPs**).
However, the rapid developments in software and hardware technologies
raises the potential liability of various non-ISP intermediaries, such
as those who develop hardware devices such as mod-chips.

**Hardware developers as intermediaries: mod chips**

Many gaming consoles are embedded with a technology called digital
rights management (**DRM**). DRM is a form of encodement that controls
and restricts who can access copyrighted material and how many copies
can be made. This system is designed according to the copyright owner's
authorisation. Mod chips are small hardware devices designed to bypass
these DRM systems, allowing users to access copyrighted material they
wouldn\'t normally have access to. The design and capabilities of mod
chips essentially strips devices of their DRM systems, which is often
utilised by those wishing to infringe copyright and distribute pirated
games.

Initially, mod chips were marketed for legitimate purposes, such as
allowing users access to non-region-specific games or legally imported
titles that weren't yet available in their country. However, the
widespread commercial success of mod chips is arguably due to their
ability to bypass copyright protections, raising concerns about their
legality under copyright law. According to section 116A of the
*Copyright Act 1968* (Cth) (**Copyright Act**), the primary function of
a device determines its legality. If its main purpose is to facilitate
copyright infringement, it is likely to be classified as an illegal
circumvention device.

Despite being illegal in America and most European countries, mod chips
remain prima facie legal in Australia. This discrepancy is rooted in the
way different jurisdictions define technological protection measures
(**TPMs**) and the corresponding classification of mod chips as
circumvention devices. A comparison of case law from Australia and
Canada offers insight into how different jurisdictions approach this
issue.

**Comparative Case Law: Australia vs. Canada**

**Stevens v Kabushiki Kaisha Sony Computer Entertainment (Australia)**

In the Australian case of *Stevens v Kabushiki Kaisha Sony Computer
Entertainment*, Stevens sold and installed mod chips designed to
circumvent Sony's DRM. Sony argued that this violated section 116A of
the Copyright Act, which prohibits distributing circumvention devices.
The High Court, however, ruled that Sony's DRM did not qualify as a TPM
under the Copyright Act. This ruling was based on the court's
interpretation that DRM's primary function was to control access to
copyrighted material, rather than to prevent copyright infringement.
Since the DRM was not considered a TPM, Stevens's use of mod chips to
bypass it did not violate the law. The court's decision highlights the
narrow interpretation of what qualifies as a TPM under Australian law.

**Nintendo v Go Cyber Shopping Ltd. (Canada)**

In the Canadian case *Nintendo v Go Cyber Shopping Ltd.*, the court
reached a different conclusion. Nintendo sued a company that sold mod
chips allowing users to play pirated games on Nintendo consoles. The
Canadian court ruled that Nintendo's DRM did qualify as a TPM, and
therefore, the sale of mod chips constituted a violation of Canadian
copyright laws. The key difference between the Canadian and Australian
rulings lies in how each jurisdiction interprets the concept of a TPM.

**Narrow definition of a TPM**

In Australia, the narrow definition of a TPM, which focuses on whether
the primary purpose of the measure is to prevent copyright infringement,
leads to more permissive outcomes regarding mod chips. In Canada, the
broader interpretation of a TPM, which includes access control
mechanisms like DRM, results in a stricter legal stance against the sale
and use of mod chips.

**Future directions**

Following the Australia--United States Free Trade Agreement
(**AUSFTA**), which introduces a broader definition of TPMs through its
reference to \"effective technological measures\" (**ETMs**) in Article
17.4.7, there has been pressure to expand the definition of TPM in
Australia. However, the narrow standard that emphasises preventing
infringement remains in force. In 2015, the Attorney General rejected
recommendations to amend the *Copyright Amendment (Online Infringement)
Bill* to outlaw mod chips that bypass region coding. Instead, the Bill
only outlawed mod chips whose sole purpose is to overcome anti-piracy
technology. This legislative decision highlights Australia\'s continued
divergence from other countries\' stricter approaches, reaffirming its
focus on the primary intent of these devices when considering
intermediary liability.
