**Governing Crypto Assets**

a)  **Introduction to Crypto assets**

***What is a Crypto Asset?***

The term crypto asset refers to a class of asset that encompasses
several different individual assets, including cryptocurrencies (such as
Bitcoin or Ethereum), stablecoins, tokens or non-fungible tokens
(**NFTS**). The Australian Securities and Investments Commission
(**ASIC**) defines crypto assets as:

"*A digital representation of value or contractual rights that can be
transferred, stored or traded electronically. Crypto assets use
cryptography, distributed ledger technology or other technology to
provide features such as security and pseudo-anonymity".*

Crypto assets are an asset with a digital representation and use
cryptography or distributed ledger technology (**DLT**).

***What is Distributed Ledger Technology?***

DLT is a type of technology that records and tracks data in a
'distributed' network. This means that multiple participants have secure
and consistent access to information on the ledger. It is secured using
cryptography, a complex set of mathematical algorithms. The most common
type of DLT is blockchain.

***How does blockchain work?***

1.  Every transaction gets sent to the network where it is checked by
    others in the network. If the transaction is verified, it will then
    be grouped into a 'block' with other transactions. Once the block is
    complete, it is given a unique hash as well as the hash from the
    previous block.

2.  The block is the connected to the previous block in a chain of data.
    The block links securely using the specific hash codes.

3.  Once added to the chain, the block cannot be edited as any change to
    the block will create a new hash which won't link to the previous
    block.

<!-- -->

b)  **Crypto Assets and the Australian Regulatory Framework**

The Australian Government has expressed a commitment to regulating
crypto assets, particularly in the areas of financial integrity and
consumer protection. As part of their commitment, the Australian
Government has adopted a 'token-mapping' strategy and flagged that
token-mapping will inform future policy development by ensuring
consistency in regulating economic activity, facilitate existing policy
goals and allow responsible actors to innovate with the appropriate
regulatory oversight.[^1]

Token-mapping refers to the process of identifying key activities and
functions of the crypto ecosystem and mapping them against existing
regulatory frameworks.

The government has identified that some parts of the crypto ecosystem
are regulated under existing legal provisions. Existing regulators and
the applicable provisions are summarised below:

***Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC)***

Entities that provide financial products or services are required to
hold an Australian Financial Services Licence (**AFSL**) and entities
who operate a financial market in Australia need a Market Licence.

ASIC regulates crypto assets when they fall within the definition of a
'financial product'. Whether a particular asset is considered a
financial product depends on the individual characteristics of the
asset. ASIC has released an information sheet to help entities navigate
whether a digital asset offering is regulated as a financial
product.[^2] ASIC has also released a consultation paper advising that
Exchange Traded Products (**ETPs**), which invest in crypto assets, are
classified as financial products and are regulated through ASIC.[^3]

Where crypto assets are considered a financial product, they require an
AFSL and will be subject to all the obligations attached to the licence.

**Example: *Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Bit Trade
Pty Ltd* \[2024\] FCA 953**

In August 2024, ASIC brought a successful case against a provider of a
crypto asset exchange. Bit Trade P/L, who operate the Kraken crypto
exchange, failed to comply with the design and distribution obligations
required when offering a margin trading product. Bit Trade P/L was
required to issue Target Market Determinations (**TMDs**) to all retail
customers before issuing the product. This is required to ensure that
the product is appropriate for the consumer.

The key issue was whether the Kraken Crypto Exchange was considered a
financial product, which was required to issue TMDs. Some credit
facilities are exempt from this obligation and Bit Trade P/L argued they
were one of them. Ultimately, the case came down to whether Bit Trade
offered 'debt' through their margin extension product. The Federal Court
found that, regardless of whether consumers actually incurred debt, Bit
Trade P/L offered a product where they *could* incur debt and would need
to issue TMDs. Therefore, Bit Trade was in breach of their obligations.

***Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC)***

Some digital asset businesses are required to register with AUSTRAC
under the *Anti-Money Laundering and Counter Terrorism Financing Act
2006* (Cth)*.* The scope of this Act was expanded in 2018 to include
regulation of digital currencies exchanges, which includes
cryptocurrency. Digital currency exchange providers must register with
AUSTRAC and meet their reporting and compliance obligations.

***Australian Taxation Office (ATO)***

The ATO has provided several different Tax Determinations to outline the
tax treatment of crypto assets. If the crypto asset is received as a
'staking reward', the value is to be included as [assessable
income](https://www.ato.gov.au/individuals-and-families/investments-and-assets/crypto-asset-investments/transactions-acquiring-and-disposing-of-crypto-assets/staking-rewards-and-airdrops).
However, crypto assets are more commonly used for investment purposes,
which means the crypto assets will be considered a capital asset and
[CGT
provisions](https://www.ato.gov.au/individuals-and-families/investments-and-assets/crypto-asset-investments/how-to-work-out-and-report-cgt-on-crypto)
will apply.

If a [business accepts crypto assets as a form of
payment](https://www.ato.gov.au/businesses-and-organisations/income-deductions-and-concessions/income-and-deductions-for-business/crypto-assets-and-business/crypto-assets-used-in-business#ato-Receivingcryptoassetsaspaymentforservices),
they must account for these transactions in the same way they would for
fiat currency and ensure they comply with goods and services tax
obligations under the *A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act
1999* (Cth).

c)  **Proposed Regulatory Framework**

The Australian Government has been working towards regulating crypto
assets for some time. The *Digital Assets (Market Regulation) Bill 2023*
(Cth) was introduced to Parliament but was rejected in September 2023 in
the Senate for lacking detail and certainty for investors.

In October 2023, the government released a paper proposing new
regulation for Digital Asset Platforms*.*[^4] They propose to regulate
crypto assets using existing licencing frameworks. This is in line with
the international recommendation that regulations should be consistent
between traditional and emerging financial intermediaries.

This proposal involves introducing a new financial product, known as a
'digital asset facility' (**DAF**), which will cover digital asset
custody arrangements as well as multi-function digital asset platforms
that allow consumers to transfer and withdraw tokens. The proposal
predominately focuses on ensuring providers of these products are
licenced.

Given that the DAF will, itself, be considered a financial product,
entities providing services in relation to DAFs will be required to hold
an AFSL. Such entities include platform providers (entities who issue
DAFs), brokers and dealers (who arrange for consumers to use the DAF),
and financial advisors (given that they provide advice in respect of
DAF). Their licence would require that these entities comply with the
general obligations, financial requirements and other relevant
obligations. These obligations cover general requirements such as having
appropriate dispute resolution and risk management systems, and ensuring
that they comply with Australian financial laws, but also cover more
tailored requirements including solvency and positive net asset
requirements.

[^1]: Australian Government The Treasury, *Token-Mapping* (Consultation
    Paper, February 2023)
    \<<https://treasury.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-02/c2023-341659-cp.pdf>\>

[^2]: ASIC, *Crypto-assets* (Information Sheet 225, October 2021) \<
    https://asic.gov.au/regulatory-resources/digital-transformation/crypto-assets/#part-c\>.

[^3]: ASIC, *Crypto-assets as underlying assets for ETPs and other
    investment products* (Consultation Paper 343, June 2021)
    \<https://download.asic.gov.au/media/yhbgvq02/cp343-published-30-june-2021.pdf\>.

[^4]: Australian Government, *Regulating digital asset platforms*
    (Proposal Paper, October 2023)
    \<https://treasury.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-10/c2023-427004-proposal-paper-finalised.pdf\>.
