**1. Smart Contracts and Blockchain Technology**

**a. Introduction to Smart Contracts and Blockchain Technology**

A blockchain is a decentralised digital ledger that securely records
transactions across a network of computers. Instead of storing data in a
central location, it organises information and transactions into
\"blocks,\" which are linked together in a chronological \"chain.\"
Smart contracts build on this technology by utilising the blockchain to
execute agreements or transactions instantly and securely when certain
conditions or instructions are met, adding a new layer of functionality
and efficiency. For example, if a smart contract could be set up so that
as soon as you purchased concert tickets online, the tickets were
automatically transferred to your digital wallet.

**b. Australian Legal Framework and Regulation**

In Australia, smart contracts are regulated under the *Electronic
Transactions Act 1999* (Cth) (**ETA**). The ETA ensures electronic
contracts are treated similarly to traditional paper-based contracts.
For a smart contract to be legally valid in Australia, it must meet the
conventional criteria of a contract, such as intention, offer and
acceptance, consideration and certainty.

**c. Advantages and Disadvantages of Smart Contracts**

Smart contracts offer the potential to streamline transactions by
eliminating intermediaries, however their reliance on computer code
makes them susceptible to flaws.

**Advantages**

-   *Removal of Intermediary*: traditional transactions often require a
    third party such as a lawyer, broker or financial institution to
    facilitate and validate a contract. This adds time, cost and the
    potential for human error. Smart contracts by contrast, allow
    parties to interact directly, streamlining the process and reducing
    reliance on third parties. Yet, this also means there is no third
    party to catch mistakes, leaving participants to navigate potential
    complexities alone - a shift that could be either empowering or
    risky.

-   *Autonomous:* smart contracts operate independently, executing terms
    without the need for human intervention. Once conditions are met,
    the contract will be automatically fulfilled, reducing the risk of
    delays or manual errors. However, this autonomy also means
    flexibility is limited -- if adverse circumstances arise, the
    ability to modify or halt a contract may be constrained.

-   *Transparency:* the blockchain makes it possible for anyone, not
    just those involved in the smart contract, to see and follow all
    progress of a contract, providing a unique level of transparency.
    Given the contract\'s execution is stored on the blockchain, there
    is a verifiable and permanent record of every action which is taken.

**Disadvantages**

-   *Potential for errors in code:* unlike traditional contracts which
    can be revised and renegotiated if mistakes are found, smart
    contracts are often unchangeable once deployed. A small bug or
    oversight may lead to unintended actions.

-   *Security and privacy concerns:* smart contracts, if not properly
    coded, can be exploited by hackers leading to stolen funds or
    unauthorised transactions. Additionally, as blockchains are publicly
    accessible, sensitive information could be exposed if not adequately
    protected. While the transparent nature of smart contracts can
    increase trust, it can also compromise privacy, with all
    transactions and contract details potentially visible to anyone on
    the network.

-   *Complexity in design:* designing a blockchain agreement currently
    requires a deep understanding of the technical aspects of blockchain
    programming. The process of translating legal language into code is
    complex and could result in misinterpretations or gaps in the
    contracts logic.

**d. Smart Contracts: Case Study**

In 2016, the DAO (**Decentralized Autonomous Organization**) was one of
the most famous and earliest applications of smart contracts on the
Ethereum blockchain. The DAO, through smart contracts, allowed
participants to invest in projects without the need of intermediaries.
However, a vulnerability in computer code was exploited, allowing bad
actors to steal approximately \$70 million USD of Ethereum. This event
highlighted the potential risks associated with errors in smart contract
code. Read more here: [Bitstamp: Ethereum Dao
Hack](https://www.bitstamp.net/learn/crypto-101/ethereum-dao-hack/)
